Expanded Metaprogramming
========================

## Overview

Scala 3 introduces a new macro system that replaces the experimental Scala 2 system with one that
should be more sound, simpler to use, and simpler for the Scala team to maintain.

Unfortunately, the current Scala 3 metaprogramming system is more restrictive than the Scala 2 system and has yet to
offer replacements for missing key features. This has resulted in many libraries not being portable to Scala 3. If left
unaddressed, this choice threatens to fracture the Scala ecosystem and version-lock a large number of libraries, and
all or part of codebases dependent on those libraries, to 2.13. 

Re-using 2.13 artifacts is a temporary solution, but eventually 2.13 will be EOL'd. 

This fracturing will sap community energy from the Scala 3 ecosystem upgrade if library authors see
little reason to upgrade, and no viable path. Long term it may have long-term consequences for Scala 3's uptake and
viability.

Perhaps the largest feature missing from Scala 3 today is the lack of support for expressive 
compile-time metaprogramming of classes. In Scala 2, the community used macro annotations. Scala 3
addressed a few of the use-cases of macro annotations, but we still lack a feature that offers
the full range of expressive capability of macro annotations.

This document proposes a replacement for users and authors of macro annotations that should:
* offer nearly same expressive power,
* address all major use cases,
* be simpler to maintain, and
* be safer and easier to use.

On the implementation side this replacement should:
* live within the compiler itself,
* be simpler to maintain, 
* expose no compiler internals, and
* re-use the existing macro system and its semantics as much as possible.

Most importantly, this feature should fit cleanly into the existing Scala 3 macro model and
existing language features.

## Desired Metaprogramming Capabilities

There are two key design principles this feature should follow:
1. Nothing extraneous should be required to be generated by a macro.
2. User code as written must not be altered, unless the code is explicitly marked as modifiable.

Due to various limitations, macro annotations in Scala 2 are unable to adhere to either design principle.

This leaves macro annotations effectively unrestricted in their capabilities. This is because 
at their core they are simply a function of AST => AST. This means they can
* alter the inheritance hierarchy of a class/trait/object
* change order, types, or names of class parameters
* modify generic type parameters

Instead, we want Scala 3 to have a more restricted set of capabilities. These are:
* add new declarations (fields, methods, types, classes, etc) at compile-time
* into existing named traits/classes/objects
* as a function of:
  * content of the enclosing trait/class/object
  * static parameters
* overriding existing declarations when explicitly allowed.

## Export Macros

By extending the semantics of the newly introduced `export` keyword, we can achieve most of the
design goals. 

The `export` keyword currently adds forwarders to selected members of an object. Today this object
is defined by a path to a stable identifier. The syntax could be extended to allow `export` 
to add forwarders to objects instantiated via macro. For example:

```scala

def someMacro(b:Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes, ExportContext): Expr[Any] = {
  if (b.value)
    '{
      object freshTermName {
        def fizzle: Boolean = true
      }
    }
  else
    '{
      object freshTermName {
        def swizzle: Double = -1.0d
      }
    }
}

class Foo {
  export ${someMacro(true)}
}

class Bar {
  export ${someMacro(false)}
}
```

In this example, the class `Foo` would have the method `fizzle` added, whereas the class `Bar` would 
have the method `swizzle` added.

The function `someMacro` would look and operate nearly identical to a normal macro, with some key differences.

First, the macro would also take as a `given` an `ExportContext`. This parameter would describe the
content of the object the macro was called from, including any methods, fields, constructors, type
parameters, etc, as well as the full AST of the object.

Second, while object declarations themselves do not have a well-specified type in Scala 3, so the macro returns
an `Expr[Any]`j, the macro would be restricted to returning an `object` of some shape.

Third, normal `export` rules would apply to forwarding declarations of the sythesized object. At least for
an initial POC.

## Inline Traits

Extending `export` is only part of ensuring a compelling user story for expressive metaprogramming
in Scala 3. Library authors and users will want a more convenient mechanism for accessing and encapsulating
this functionality.

The semantics of the `inline` keyword could be extended to include creating `inline trait` objects. These
would be a `trait` for which the definition is not fixed until it is instantiated at compile-time
by some inheriting object. Our previous example could be re-written to look something like:

```scala

inline trait SwiFizzler(inline b: Boolean) {
  def someMacro(b:Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes, ExportContext): Expr[Any] = {
    if (b.value)
    '{
      object freshTermName {
        def fizzle: Boolean = true
      }
    }
    else
    '{
      object freshTermName {
        def swizzle: Double = -1.0d
      }
    }
  }

  export ${someMacro(b)}
  
}

class Foo extends inline SwiFizzler(true)

class Bar extends inline SwiFizzler(false)
```

The `inline trait` `SwiFizzler` wraps up and encapsulates the macro allowing it to be re-used more easily.
In addition, it also gives library authors a place to ensure that necessary base classes or traits are included,
any self-types declared, and any normal methods or fields can be easily found and documented. 

`inline b: Boolean` needs to be static!!!

Classes extending an `inline trait` must explicitly notate the relationship. This serves two purposes:
1. Code readers are immediately informed that the content of the base class will include synthesized members.
2. The compiler can eagerly follow paths better optimized for metaprogramming.

### Alternative Syntax

An alternative to

```scala
class Bar extends inline SwiFizzler(false)
```

could be to follow DLang and append a `!` to the symbol:

```scala
class Bar extends SwiFizzler!(false)
```

This would be more concise at the cost of being less visually obvious.

## Limitations

The combination of extending `export` and introducing `inline trait` introduces no compromises
or limitations. The design goals appear to be met, and all desired capabilities achieved.

It is not clear which, if any, major use-cases are not supported. 

companion objects

## Other Features

### Export Override

Export is very restrictive. Some metaprogramming use-cases will conflict strongly with those restrictions.
One such restriction is that exported declarations are not allowed to override an existing member. 

One use-case where being able to override an existing member is when users would like to have a custom
version of `toString` that performs some function. This could be security related, like redacting particular
fields, or as trivial as being able to add ANSI color codes for pretty printing. 

The syntax of `export` could be extended so that `export override ...` is valid and allows exported 
definitions to override existing definitions where they would otherwise conflict.

## Upgrade path from Scala 2

Scala 2 code using macro annotations could be automatically upgraded assuming an appropriate scalafix
rule is generated by the library author. 



NOTES
=====

Scala 3's current metaprogramming approach solves many of the problems 

 - macro annotations
 - white box macros
 - no
 
https://scalacenter.github.io/scala-3-migration-guide/docs/macros/macro-libraries.html
https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/1693
https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues/1694
https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/annotation-macros/1211/20
https://users.scala-lang.org/t/macro-annotations-replacement-in-scala-3/7374
https://docs.scala-lang.org/overviews/macros/annotations.html
https://www.reddit.com/r/scala/comments/ce9v9l/can_dotty_macro_add_method_to_class/

https://www.scala-lang.org/blog/2018/04/30/in-a-nutshell.html
 - promised macro annotations, but that never materialized


Something less ambiguous than annotations
 - normally annotations are just data
 - and may be picked up by something else
 - Java has changed perspectives a bit in this case

Something less powerful than macro annotations
 - too unconstrained in what they were allowed to do


## Problem

Hygiene and referential transparency by default.

odersky really wants to avoid creating language dialects

implementation options
 - syntactic transformation (preprocessor)
 - AST transformation (macro annotations, __evolves)
 - AST modifications (returned list of mods)
 - exported decls

treat target grammar not as AST, but as higher-level decls the language grammar captures

# Examples and Use Cases

# Scalameta

https://scalameta.org/

how does scalameta fit into this?

why is it not a good solution? 
 - feels equivalent to a C preprocessor
 - purely mechanical syntactic transformations
 - can't express type driven expansion (no live givens/implicits to expand code using)
 - complex build integration, has to generate the code that will eventually be compiled

what can it not solve?

run-time metaprogramming
compile-time metaprogramming

pre-processor level
syntactic-level
semantic-level
run-time-level

links with specialization
links with macro annotations

concrete use-cases
* from a case class auto-generate a builder pattern + validators
* schema evolution from base case class and migration decls
* generate client or server impls from a trait
* override toString or other fields to hide security-related content
* mixin logging/metrics/etc boilerplate


capabilities matrix:
* replace/add/remove
  * shouldn't be able to remove (in general), except for specially marked decls
  * though could be useful for case classes and copy/apply
  * then removal becomes "prevent generation of"
* methods or fields or inner objects or whatever
* add/remove traits, base classes
  * understand use case better... 
* on a single instance or for every instance (class-level)
  * obviously runtime metaprogramming...

=> compatible with type safety
=> how does it work with Selectable?

annotations usually transform entire classes
 * could annotate method generate or transform single method?

`export ${macro}`
 - could act like a mixin for a class or trait body

the main complications
 - how to handle the companion object
 - how to extend class with new traits

part of the goal is for the macro to receive a typed rather than raw AST to transform
avoid the two step process in scala 2 of compiling macros in one module, then can run in another

should be able to override an existing method definition with another one
 - @ToStringObfuscate - override toString for security purposes

# Solution

## why have a new syntatic construct? why not just make macro annotations work?

principle of least surprise

annotations can't take arguments

clear user intention


    object IfTrueThenFooElseBar {
      def evolved(b: Expr[Boolean])(template: Expr[Any])(using Quotes): TemplateMod = {
        if b.valueOrError then
          Modification.mixin('{def foo: Int = 1})
        else
          Modification.mixin('{def bar: String = "1"})
      }
    }

    class HasMethodFoo __evolves IfTrueThenFooElseBar(true)
    class HasMethodBar __evolves IfTrueThenFooElseBar(false)

    class HasMethodBar = IfTrueThenFooElseBar(false, class _ [T](t:T) extends Foo,Bar {
      // ...
    })

anonymous dsl for classes/traits/methods
have to be bound to a name to become "real"

    object IfTrueThenFooElseBar {
      def evolved(b: Boolean)(template: Expr[Any])(using Quotes): TemplateMod = {
        if b.valueOrError then
          Modification.mixin('{def foo: Int = 1})
        else
          Modification.mixin('{def bar: String = "1"})
      }
    }

    class HasMethodFoo __evolves IfTrueThenFooElseBar(true)
    class HasMethodBar __evolves IfTrueThenFooElseBar(false)

////

    import scala.annotation.StaticAnnotation
    import scala.language.experimental.macros
    import scala.reflect.macros.whitebox

    class ToStringObfuscate(fieldsToObfuscate: String*) extends StaticAnnotation {
      def macroTransform(annottees: Any*): Any = macro ToStringObfuscateImpl.impl
    }



////

would f-bounded types make this easier?

    // enforced by the compiler to be actual literal values?
    inline trait ToStringObfuscate(fieldsToObfuscate: String*)(optional implicits for quotes? context? base type?) {
      // export inline / override
      export override ${
        override def toString: String = {
          scala.runtime.ScalaRunTime._toString(this.copy(..$fieldReplacements))
        }
      }
    }

    object ToStringObfuscate {
      // magic method here to transform companion object?
    }

    case class User(name:String, password:String) inline ToStringObfuscate("password")


what kinds of arguments can you pass to an annotation?
 - probably can't pass a Repr too easily

# Discussion

expanding the capabilities of scala meta programming

can add classes to classpath?

dsl to directly register annotations for processing with the compiler?
 - rather than having it pickup indirectly, have code that registers
 - the behavior directly with the compiler?

expanding an inline trait will have to happen within
the typer itself, much like the deriving clause works.

trying after the typer will fail type checking

pre-typer can't work, because you'll want expansion to happen
with values having inferred types

interaction with derived? expansion should occur first

interaction with specialized? 

path to run-time metaprogramming?

goals:
  - inject one of two methods into a class depending on the type parameter
  - some way to take the class body as input during expansion
  - some way to append instructions to be evaluation during class expansion
  - annotations -> inline traits
  - case class A -> repr -> case class B


inline needs to work something like a Template => Template lambda

can an inline trait
  - extend interfaces? probably should
  - declare regular defs and vals? probably should
  - be matchable? maybe?
  - open, final methods, denote methods open for re-writing? private open? new modifier?
    - soft keyword?


 add/remove/rename/restructure methods as a function of literal arguments and types

 what is the execution model?
   - are all types fully known before executing the modifiers?

 Use @specialized to mark a method that may be transformed by an inline trait
 by whose name will name the same
 @specialized def foo: Any

 Use `erased` to indicate input vals, defs, and types?

 input object pattern? declare an erased object named `args` that the
 trait can take as input?

 do we want templates and macros?

 i think the trait macro needs to return something other than Expr[T]

 how/when is the macro "code" run?

 for now - restrict the grammar to adding new symbols (methods,vals,types)

 a modification should act a bit like a state monad, when asking for
 current context the entity should look like it has had all transforms
 applied (event sourced model?)
   - that would mean modifications are TemplateBody => TemplateBody in general
   but limited to (TemplateBody, CurrentState) => ModRule for debugging context
   - should be able to see other mod rules?


two methods
  1) a special method in an Object, similar to derived
    plus a special keyword to denote transformation by said method
  2) inline trait + def[this] for purely simple additive changes to templates
    still not quite clear how this would work, Expr as constructor body? special mixin method?

how does this get integrated into the AST?
should look like function application?
deriving uses a specially named method call `derived` in the companion

limited to what can be done with inline params and the self type

 could the `export` keyword be used?

 combine internal object with export clause?
 
    import scala.quoted._
    
    object ExpandMacro {
      def somemacroimpl(b: Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes): Expr[String] = {
        summon[Quotes].appliedTo()
        if (b.valueOrError)
          '{"true"}
        else
          '{"false"}
      }
    }

    object example {
      import scala.quoted._

      def somemacroimpl(b: Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes): Expr[String] = {
        if (b.valueOrError)
          '{"true"}
        else
          '{"false"}
      }

      inline def somemacro(inline b: Boolean): String =
        ${somemacroimpl('b)}
    }

    object uses {
      import example._

      somemacro(true)
    }


///////////////////


groovy like meta programming in scala

register traits (unit of behavior) with the meta class to mixin behavior

val e = new Expando()

trait Named {
  var name: String
}

Expando.metaclass.addBehavior[Named]

// flow typing?
val en = e.as[Named]
en.name = "bob"

emulate a record type with the features:

val r = Record(Field["foo", Int], Field["bar", String])

r.foo = 12
val rd: Record { def foo: Int, def bar: String, def baz: Double } = r.withField["baz", Double]
